README.md, before:

```
           /^\/^\  COVID
         _|__|  O|  Illumina
\/     /~     \_/ \    Pipeline
 \____|__________/  \      Snakemake edition v0.1.0
        \_______      \
                `\     \                 \
                  |     |                  \
                 /      /                    \
                /     /                       \\
              /      /                         \ \
             /     /                            \  \
           /     /             _----_            \   \
          /     /           _-~      ~-_         |   |
         (      (        _-~    _--_    ~-_     _/   |
          \      ~-____-~    _-~    ~-_    ~-_-~    /
            ~-_           _-~          ~-_       _-~
               ~--______-~                ~-___-~    

```

# COVID Illumina Snakemake Pipeline
A pipeline to facilitate genomic surveillance of SARS-CoV-2, adopted by the several labs in SAViD. The starting point is a collection of raw Illumina short reads; the end point is a collection of QC files, consensus genome(s), variant calls, and various QC metrics.

Author: Dr Charles Foster

# Starting out
To begin with, clone this github repository:

```
git clone https://github.com/charlesfoster/covid-illumina-snakemake.git

cd covid-illumina-snakemake
```

Next, install dependencies using `conda`:

```
conda env create -f environment.yml
```

Pro tip: if you install `mamba`, yo ucan create the environment with that command instead of `conda`. A lot of `conda` headaches go away: it's a much faster drop-in replacement for `conda`.

```
conda install mamba
mamba env create -f environment.yml
```

Finally, install the pipeline correctly with:

```
pip install .
```

Other requirements:
* Lineages are typed using `pangolin`. Accordingly, `pangolin` needs to be installed according to instructions at https://github.com/cov-lineages/pangolin.

# Usage
The environment with all necessary tools is installed as '`CIS`' for brevity. The environment should first be activated:

```
conda activate CIS
```

Then, to run the pipeline, it's as simple as:

```
CIS <directory_with_reads>
```

where <directory_with_reads> should be replaced with the full path to a directory with sequencing reads taken off an Illumina machine.

The program assumes that reads are named exactly as they are after coming off a MiSeq/iSeq, i.e. `*_L001_R1_001.fastq.gz`. This unique suffix allows the correct sample names and corresponding forward and reverse reads files to be identified. However, if you have renamed your reads files, you need to provide a suffix via `--suffix` that allows the correct samples to be identified.

Consider the situation where you have renamed your files like so: `sample1_R1.fq.gz`, `sample1_R2.fq.gz`, `sample2_R1.fq.gz`, and `sample2_R2.fq.gz`, and they're in `/home/user/reads`. Now, you will need to run the program with these minimal options:

```
CIS --suffix "_R1.fq.gz" /home/user/reads
```

The program will determine that your forward and reverse reads are in `/home/user/reads`, and that your sample names are 'sample1' and 'sample2'.

By default, the program assumes that you have used the 'Midnight' amplicon protocol. You can specify a different scheme using the `-s` (`--scheme`) option.

All other options are as follows, and can be accessed with `CIS --help`:

```
usage: CIS [options] <query_directory>

covid-illumina-snakemake: a pipeline for analysis SARS-CoV-2 samples

positional arguments:
  query_directory       Path to directory with reads to process.

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -i ISOLATES, --isolates ISOLATES
                        List of isolates to assemble (Default: all isolates in query_directory)
  -f, --force           Force overwriting of completed files (Default: files not overwritten)
  -k KRAKEN2_DB, --kraken2_db KRAKEN2_DB
                        kraken2 database. Default: /data/kraken_files/k2_standard_20201202
  -n, --dry_run         Dry run only
  -o OUTDIR, --outdir OUTDIR
                        Output directory. Default: /home/cfos/Programs/COVID_Illumina_Snakemake/results/2021-07-23
  -p, --print_dag       Save directed acyclic graph (DAG) of workflow
  -r REFERENCE, --reference REFERENCE
                        Reference genome to use (Default: /home/cfos/miniconda3/envs/CIS/lib/python3.9/site-
                        packages/CIS/bin/NC_045512.fasta)
  -s SCHEME, --scheme SCHEME
                        Primer scheme to use: built-in opts are 'midnight', 'swift', 'eden', but if using your own scheme provide
                        the full path to the bed file here (Default: midnight)
  -t <int>, --threads <int>
                        Number of threads to use
  -v, --version         show program's version number and exit
  --suffix <str>        Suffix used to identify samples from reads. Default: _L001_R1_001.fastq.gz
  --max_memory <int>    Maximum memory (in MB) that you would like to provide to snakemake. Default: 55003MB
  --verbose             Print junk to screen.
```

# What does the pipeline do?
- [Initial QC: adapter removal, error correction, QC reports](#Initial-QC)
- [Read mapping](#Read-mapping)
- [Processing of mapped reads](#Processing-of-mapped-reads)
- [Assess coverage](#Assess-coverage)
- [Variant calling](#Variant-calling)
- [SNP annotation](#SNP-annotation)
- [Generate consensus genome](#Generate-consensus-genome)
- [Pangolin lineage assignment](#Pangolin-lineage-assignment)
- [Summary statistics](#Summary-statistics)
- [Explanation of output files](#Explanation-of-output-files)
- [Next steps](#Next-steps)
- [Citations](#Citations)
- [Other credits](#Other-credits)

# Initial QC
The initial QC is done with `fastp` (https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp/). View the `fastp` repository for a full list of what the program can do. In this pipeline we leverage `fastp` to:
1. filter out bad reads (reads with too many bases below a quality threshold)
2. cut sequencing adapters, with adapter sequences automatically detected via overlap analysis of PE data
3. correct mismatched base pairs in overlapped regions of paired end reads, if one base is with high quality while the other is with ultra low quality
4. report results in JSON format for further interpreting.
5. visualize quality control and filtering results in a single HTML page (like FASTQC but faster and more informative).

# Read mapping
Reads are mapped to the SARS-CoV-2 reference genome with `bwa mem`.

# Processing of mapped reads
The `ivar` suite of tools is used to remove primers from the mapped reads, and carry out quality trimming. Since quality trimming is already carried out by `fastp`, this is a second "line of defence" and might be superflous. After testing, the quality trimming option in `ivar` might be disabled.

# Assess coverage
The coverage for each base in the SAS-CoV-2 genome is calculated with `bedtools`, and then plotted in R. The coverage for each amplicon within the bed file specifying primer coordinates is also plotted (but not for the Swift protocol since it has too many amplicons).

# Variant calling
Variants are called using `ivar`.

# SNP annotation
SNPs are annotated using `snpEff`, giving information including the Ts:Tv ratio, and any functional consequences of the SNPs.

# Generate consensus genome
A consensus genome is generated for each sample using `samtools mpileup` +  `ivar`

# Pangolin lineage assignment
Newly generated consensus genomes from `ivar` are assigned to Pangolin lineages using `pangolin`.

# Summary statistics
A `.csv` file with quality control summary statistics is printed to the results directory.

# Explanation of output files
Results for each sample will be placed in their own directory. There are also logical subdirectories containing the results of each specific analysis.

# Citations
When this pipeline is used, the following programs should be cited because they're integral to the pipeline working:

* Heng Li, Bob Handsaker, Alec Wysoker, Tim Fennell, Jue Ruan, Nils Homer, Gabor Marth, Goncalo Abecasis, Richard Durbin, 1000 Genome Project Data Processing Subgroup, The Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools, Bioinformatics, Volume 25, Issue 16, 15 August 2009, Pages 2078–2079, https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp352
* Grubaugh, N.D., Gangavarapu, K., Quick, J., Matteson, N.L., De Jesus, J.G., Main, B.J., Tan, A.L., Paul, L.M., Brackney, D.E., Grewal, S. and Gurfield, N., 2019. An amplicon-based sequencing framework for accurately measuring intrahost virus diversity using PrimalSeq and iVar. Genome Biology, Volume 20, Issue 1, pp. 1-19, https://doi.org/10.1101/383513
* Shifu Chen, Yanqing Zhou, Yaru Chen, Jia Gu; 2018. fastp: an ultra-fast all-in-one FASTQ preprocessor, Bioinformatics, Volume 34, Issue 17, pp. i884–i890, https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty560
* Vasimuddin Md, Sanchit Misra, Heng Li, Srinivas Aluru. Efficient Architecture-Aware Acceleration of BWA-MEM for Multicore Systems. IEEE Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS), 2019.
* Aaron R. Quinlan, Ira M. Hall, BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic features, Bioinformatics, Volume 26, Issue 6, 15 March 2010, Pages 841–842, https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq033

Note: not exhaustive. Please find missing references.

You should also find citations for the R packages in the `environment.yml` file.

# Other credits
*  `ivar_variants_to_vcf.py` was written originally by the nextflow/viralrecon team. I've modified it for our purposes.

Commit message:

Now can call variants with either ivar or lofreq

README.md, after:

```
           /^\/^\  COVID
         _|__|  O|  Illumina
\/     /~     \_/ \    Pipeline
 \____|__________/  \      Snakemake edition v0.1.0
        \_______      \
                `\     \                 \
                  |     |                  \
                 /      /                    \
                /     /                       \\
              /      /                         \ \
             /     /                            \  \
           /     /             _----_            \   \
          /     /           _-~      ~-_         |   |
         (      (        _-~    _--_    ~-_     _/   |
          \      ~-____-~    _-~    ~-_    ~-_-~    /
            ~-_           _-~          ~-_       _-~
               ~--______-~                ~-___-~    

```

# COVID Illumina Snakemake Pipeline
A pipeline to facilitate genomic surveillance of SARS-CoV-2, adopted by the several labs in SAViD. The starting point is a collection of raw Illumina short reads; the end point is a collection of QC files, consensus genome(s), variant calls, and various QC metrics.

Author: Dr Charles Foster

# Starting out
To begin with, clone this github repository:

```
git clone https://github.com/charlesfoster/covid-illumina-snakemake.git

cd covid-illumina-snakemake
```

Next, install *most* dependencies using `conda`:

```
conda env create -f environment.yml
```

Pro tip: if you install `mamba`, you can create the environment with that command instead of `conda`. A lot of `conda` headaches go away: it's a much faster drop-in replacement for `conda`.

```
conda install mamba
mamba env create -f environment.yml
```

Install the pipeline correctly with:

```
pip install .
```

Other dependencies:
* Lineages are typed using `pangolin`. Accordingly, `pangolin` needs to be installed according to instructions at https://github.com/cov-lineages/pangolin.
* Variants are called using either `lofreq` (preferred) or `ivar`. Ideally we could install these via `mamba`, but the hosted versions do not yet support htslib>=1.13 (needed for our specific `bcftools commands`). Install each program according to the documentation of each program:
  - `lofreq`: https://csb5.github.io/lofreq/installation/
  - `ivar`: https://github.com/andersen-lab/ivar#insallation (not my typo). Note: the official instructions for compiling from source are a pain. I recommend installing `ivar` `conda`/`mamba` (easiest), *but for now you will need to install it into a different environment than CIS, and add that environment's `bin/` to your path*.

Example command for installing `ivar`:

```
conda create -n ivar_env ivar=1.3.1
echo 'export PATH=$PATH:/home/cfos/miniconda3/envs/ivar_env/bin' >> ~/.bashrc
source ~/.bashrc
```

`ivar` should now be detected on your path successfully. If you already have `ivar` installed elsewhere, add that location to your `$PATH` instead. This installation will be less of a pain when `ivar` with htslib==1.13 dependency is on a conda repository.

# Usage
The environment with all necessary tools is installed as '`CIS`' for brevity. The environment should first be activated:

```
conda activate CIS
```

Then, to run the pipeline, it's as simple as:

```
CIS <directory_with_reads>
```

where <directory_with_reads> should be replaced with the full path to a directory with sequencing reads taken off an Illumina machine.

The program assumes that reads are named exactly as they are after coming off a MiSeq/iSeq, i.e. `*_L001_R1_001.fastq.gz`. This unique suffix allows the correct sample names and corresponding forward and reverse reads files to be identified. However, if you have renamed your reads files, you need to provide a suffix via `--suffix` that allows the correct samples to be identified.

Consider the situation where you have renamed your files like so: `sample1_R1.fq.gz`, `sample1_R2.fq.gz`, `sample2_R1.fq.gz`, and `sample2_R2.fq.gz`, and they're in `/home/user/reads`. Now, you will need to run the program with these minimal options:

```
CIS --suffix "_R1.fq.gz" /home/user/reads
```

The program will determine that your forward and reverse reads are in `/home/user/reads`, and that your sample names are 'sample1' and 'sample2'.

By default, the program assumes that you have used the 'Midnight' amplicon protocol. You can specify a different scheme using the `-s` (`--scheme`) option.

All other options are as follows, and can be accessed with `CIS --help`:

```
usage: CIS [options] <query_directory>

covid-illumina-snakemake: a pipeline for analysis SARS-CoV-2 samples

positional arguments:
  query_directory       Path to directory with reads to process.

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -i ISOLATES, --isolates ISOLATES
                        List of isolates to assemble (Default: all isolates in query_directory)
  -f, --force           Force overwriting of completed files (Default: files not overwritten)
  -k KRAKEN2_DB, --kraken2_db KRAKEN2_DB
                        kraken2 database. Default: /data/kraken_files/k2_standard_20201202
  -n, --dry_run         Dry run only
  -o OUTDIR, --outdir OUTDIR
                        Output directory. Default: /home/cfos/Programs/COVID_Illumina_Snakemake/results/2021-07-23
  -p, --print_dag       Save directed acyclic graph (DAG) of workflow
  -r REFERENCE, --reference REFERENCE
                        Reference genome to use (Default: /home/cfos/miniconda3/envs/CIS/lib/python3.9/site-
                        packages/CIS/bin/NC_045512.fasta)
  -s SCHEME, --scheme SCHEME
                        Primer scheme to use: built-in opts are 'midnight', 'swift', 'eden', but if using your own scheme provide
                        the full path to the bed file here (Default: midnight)
  -t <int>, --threads <int>
                        Number of threads to use
  -v, --version         show program's version number and exit
  --suffix <str>        Suffix used to identify samples from reads. Default: _L001_R1_001.fastq.gz
  --max_memory <int>    Maximum memory (in MB) that you would like to provide to snakemake. Default: 55003MB
  --verbose             Print junk to screen.
```

# What does the pipeline do?
- [Initial QC: adapter removal, error correction, QC reports](#Initial-QC)
- [Read mapping](#Read-mapping)
- [Processing of mapped reads](#Processing-of-mapped-reads)
- [Assess coverage](#Assess-coverage)
- [Variant calling](#Variant-calling)
- [SNP annotation](#SNP-annotation)
- [Generate consensus genome](#Generate-consensus-genome)
- [Pangolin lineage assignment](#Pangolin-lineage-assignment)
- [Summary statistics](#Summary-statistics)
- [Explanation of output files](#Explanation-of-output-files)
- [Next steps](#Next-steps)
- [Citations](#Citations)
- [Other credits](#Other-credits)

# Initial QC
The initial QC is done with `fastp` (https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp/). View the `fastp` repository for a full list of what the program can do. In this pipeline we leverage `fastp` to:
1. filter out bad reads (reads with too many bases below a quality threshold)
2. cut sequencing adapters, with adapter sequences automatically detected via overlap analysis of PE data
3. correct mismatched base pairs in overlapped regions of paired end reads, if one base is with high quality while the other is with ultra low quality
4. report results in JSON format for further interpreting.
5. visualize quality control and filtering results in a single HTML page (like FASTQC but faster and more informative).

# Read mapping
Reads are mapped to the SARS-CoV-2 reference genome with `bwa mem`.

# Processing of mapped reads
The `ivar` suite of tools is used to remove primers from the mapped reads, and carry out quality trimming. Since quality trimming is already carried out by `fastp`, this is a second "line of defence" and might be superflous. After testing, the quality trimming option in `ivar` might be disabled.

# Assess coverage
The coverage for each base in the SAS-CoV-2 genome is calculated with `bedtools`, and then plotted in R. The coverage for each amplicon within the bed file specifying primer coordinates is also plotted (but not for the Swift protocol since it has too many amplicons).

# Variant calling
Variants are called using `ivar`.

# SNP annotation
SNPs are annotated using `snpEff`, giving information including the Ts:Tv ratio, and any functional consequences of the SNPs.

# Generate consensus genome
A consensus genome is generated for each sample using `samtools mpileup` +  `ivar`

# Pangolin lineage assignment
Newly generated consensus genomes from `ivar` are assigned to Pangolin lineages using `pangolin`.

# Summary statistics
A `.csv` file with quality control summary statistics is printed to the results directory.

# Explanation of output files
Results for each sample will be placed in their own directory. There are also logical subdirectories containing the results of each specific analysis.

# Citations
When this pipeline is used, the following programs should be cited because they're integral to the pipeline working:

* Heng Li, Bob Handsaker, Alec Wysoker, Tim Fennell, Jue Ruan, Nils Homer, Gabor Marth, Goncalo Abecasis, Richard Durbin, 1000 Genome Project Data Processing Subgroup, The Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools, Bioinformatics, Volume 25, Issue 16, 15 August 2009, Pages 2078–2079, https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp352
* Grubaugh, N.D., Gangavarapu, K., Quick, J., Matteson, N.L., De Jesus, J.G., Main, B.J., Tan, A.L., Paul, L.M., Brackney, D.E., Grewal, S. and Gurfield, N., 2019. An amplicon-based sequencing framework for accurately measuring intrahost virus diversity using PrimalSeq and iVar. Genome Biology, Volume 20, Issue 1, pp. 1-19, https://doi.org/10.1101/383513
* Shifu Chen, Yanqing Zhou, Yaru Chen, Jia Gu; 2018. fastp: an ultra-fast all-in-one FASTQ preprocessor, Bioinformatics, Volume 34, Issue 17, pp. i884–i890, https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty560
* Vasimuddin Md, Sanchit Misra, Heng Li, Srinivas Aluru. Efficient Architecture-Aware Acceleration of BWA-MEM for Multicore Systems. IEEE Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS), 2019.
* Aaron R. Quinlan, Ira M. Hall, BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic features, Bioinformatics, Volume 26, Issue 6, 15 March 2010, Pages 841–842, https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq033

Note: not exhaustive. Please find missing references.

You should also find citations for the R packages in the `environment.yml` file.

# Other credits
*  `ivar_variants_to_vcf.py` was written originally by the nextflow/viralrecon team. I've modified it for our purposes.
